Okay, we're running.
Congratulations on a wonderful new book.
Thank you.
One of the first questions, I had jury duty Friday, and so I had the whole, I waited, you know, for eight hours.
I really had time to work on notes for this.
And one of the first things I said to him, I wrote down, is it a biography or a history?
And then, of course, you say, you know, you try to use the different forms, hoping that one will reinforce the other.
But I don't call it a biography.
I call it a history.
Yeah.
Because, first of all, I think that biography does have rules, I think.
And one of the rules is that you want to get as close to somebody's heart as possible.
And I don't take that as my assignment for King.
And secondly, you don't wander.
You don't wander as much as I do because there's so many times when I'm far, far away from King here.
I'm trying to do the things that are related to King by...
politically or by the ethos of the freedom movement and not something that affects him personally, which I think is all you would follow as a biographer.
So I call it a biographical history or a narrative history.
America in the King years pretty much sums it up to me.
And that's what I wrote in the proposal.
It's one of the few things that holds up from the proposal.
The original proposal written in 1981 saying I wanted to call it a biographical history or a narrative history.
America and the King Years, I thought it would take three years.
When I wrote my first proposal, it's almost laughable to look at it.
I mean, my guy hadn't even been arrested yet.
The guy who was the star of my book.
Really?
I didn't even know he existed.
So you're a clairvoyant.
No, I was working on other stuff.
And then the book I'm working on now, I'm looking at the proposal that I did on this book three years ago.
And what's turning out to be the three most important chapters aren't even in there.
You know?
Yeah.
So go figure.
But you knew what you were up to.
Right.
And also it allows you to really profile Malcolm X. It allows you to... Through Abraham Heschel.
Abraham, exactly.
And all these others.
And LBJ.
And if you want to spend a little time with Hoover and RFK, you know, you can do that with a biographical history because they're very important players.
Right.
Yeah, I'd say they're important players in this era.
So, yeah, I don't get...
There are plenty of arguments about this, but most of them are political arguments.
Arguments among professional writers?
Among movement people, is King over or under-emphasized?
Some people resent, particularly students say that all this history is reduced to King, and other people say there are too many peripheral figures.
But those are political.
Those aren't questions of craft.
I don't really have many craft people saying, well, the way you... No, I don't think it.
I certainly wouldn't crack.
And I think King is more, and you even say it in the book, is more metaphor for you than he is a biographical subject.
Maybe you could tell me a little bit what he is for you metaphorically.
Well, you know, the 54-68 period, which is what the whole thing is about, the three volumes, is
It really begins in the year, the Brown decision, ends in 68 with the movement falling apart, and it is kind of, sometimes I've called it the rise of classical post-war liberalism.
Other times I've said that it's really the civil rights movement.
The pressures created by World War II when you're fighting people
totalitarianism on behalf of the free world, and now you come back and people say, well, do we mean it at home?
Because that's kind of a reality check of the Civil Rights Movement.
It kind of created all of this period, the lynchings of soldiers when they came home, and it built up into the 54 to 68 period.
So from the Brown decision to 68 is a discrete era, it seems to me, when there is a movement rising up to test
for this century, what was tested by the Civil War and Reconstruction in the last century, which is what do we mean by democratic principles as applied to race, to slavery or to segregation.
And I just think that it's a very discreet period of history.
And King, it seems to me, you could call it the King years for a number of reasons.
One, at its simplest level, is...
absolute coincidence that he began his ministry.
He took his first church in the year of the Brown decision.
He hardly gets there when the bus boycott breaks out and he's drafted into its leadership.
And for all the periods thereafter when he's not at the heart of the civil rights movement or when he's not at the forefront, when he's
He's not the leader of the sit-ins.
He's not the leader of the Freedom Rides.
He didn't want to join them.
He tried to get out of them.
But he is at the heart of the argument about what's it about.
And the people who are ahead of him in the Freedom Rides want his involvement.
And the people who want to stop the Freedom Rides come to him to stop them.
So he's the...
He's the hub at the center of the wheel with all the folks of this period.
And, of course, he's killed in 68.
68, which is when you have the fragmentation of the movement.
So he's there from the beginning to the end.
You know, it'd be ridiculous to call it America in the Snake years or America in the Bob Moses years or America in the... You could call it America in the era of the Freedom Movement, but...
Who the hell knows Bob Moses with all due respect?
I thought you were talking about Robert Moses.
In New York.
You're not the only one.
Speaking of Bibria files, if you go to the LBJ library and you ask for the file on Bob Moses, you get them co-mingled.
They have one file on Robert Moses with huge amounts of Bob Moses of New York, and occasionally you have to go through there and look for the... Is it a computer entry or a catalog entry?
Just out of curiosity.
catalog.
Now, maybe it's been computerized.
This is what people say when you talk about going over to computers.
The researcher only knows, unless the researcher demands to go see the archives personally, what the computer tells you is in there.
And if somebody's screwing up and saying, Bob Moses, because they're contemporaneous, you know, be a letter to the president from Robert Moses, 1961,
That sounds terrible.
All this stuff about the West Side Highway and all this, and those ones from Bob Moses, please protect us at Freedom Summer, the other Bob Moses.
So anyway, that's where America and the King years comes, and it just seems to me that this is the era.
See, I see it as a recurring thing, as a recurring thing where you really test what equal citizenship means, and that this period did that and sucked in
all kinds of other energies and related questions once you get the country energized about that the way it had been in the Civil War years.
And so I see that as part of a continuing American story, and King is at the heart of this one.
When you proposed it, did you propose a trilogy?
No, I proposed one built-in book.
It's going to take three years.
And the first time it was my idea about it.
The first time it was my idea, because after a while I wrote all of this, I had to cut over 700 pages of manuscript out of part in the water.
I hope it went to here.
No?
No.
They're out.
They're gone.
That's so sad.
It's like unwriting.
You couldn't even use it for here?
No, not really.
Someday I'll go back and look at it.
I mean, the whole process of cutting something like that is quite a... Tell me about it.
I know.
I mean, I cut several hundred pages out of my own.
First time I went through, it was a 1,900-page manuscript.
First time I went through, and I took two or three days, and I went through, and I think I cut ten pages, because I'm doing widows and all this.
But in order to do it at the level you have to do it, it's almost like you have to build up kind of a bloodlust.
Well, that's when you bring Alice in.
Well, Alice was...
Alice was standing behind me with a big mallet.
She's legendary for her ability to... Did you have Alice from the outside?
Oh, yeah, I've had Alice.
I had Alice beginning with Blind Ambition, a book I did on Watergate 20-something years ago, first one.
This is my fifth book with Alice.
She's been here for... Blind Ambition?
John Dean's book about Watergate.
Yes, I was his ghostwriter for that.
That was the best written book of the whole lot.
Congratulations.
Thank you.
I'm still proud of that book.
Do they say this here?
No.
Jerry did.
No, it's not listed there, although my book with Bill Russell is listed there, and it was signed under the same contract.
But when we finished, he said, look, gosh, you've really worked hard.
You wrote the book, and he insisted that I'd be on.
Yeah, that's pretty decent.
But it's not Bill Russell's ambition.
to be a writer.
Bill Russell, what are we talking about?
Of the Celtics.
Okay.
Not William Russell, senator from the Celtics.
No, no, no, no, no.
This is Bill Russell, the Celtics.
No, when I was starting to write after my magazine career, I thought writers, when I decided I wanted to... See, they didn't give me a bio of you.
Do you mind giving me a little... No.
When I decided that I wanted to, after a magazine career, I was, as a kid,
Try to do it in one sentence per decade almost, and then you can ask if you want to know any more about it.
I grew up in the segregated South, utterly disinterested in all politics.
My father ran a dry cleaning plant, said that anybody interested in politics couldn't find honest work.
My father ran a dry cleaning plant.
I worked in the cleaners.
We did laundry too.
We did cleaning and laundry.
And I got interested in, and I lived in Atlanta, Dr. King City, but never saw him in the flesh.
But I was transfixed by some of the demonstrations I saw on television.
I asked my parents how it could be happening.
And they didn't have an answer.
How old are you?
I'm 51 now.
So I was in high school, early high school.
And when I got to college, which is where?
Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
I started losing interest.
I was planning to be a doctor, and from asking how this could happen and what is this amazing movement I see on TV, I started studying history and politics.
I dropped all my pre-med courses after a while, got interested in politics, caught up with it, and couldn't make up my mind what I wanted to do, whether I wanted to teach or go into politics, so I backed into writing instead.
and magazines at the Washington Monthly and then Harper's and Esquire writing magazine columns and then basically decided I didn't want to be a magazine writer the rest of my life but that I wasn't going to grow up and find what I really wanted to do so I should try writing and to me writing was writing books and writing books was novels but I couldn't get a contract to write a novel and I had to support myself and so I said what do novels do?
Novelists do they write through the eyes of their characters who are different
And I saw that that's what a ghostwriter would do.
So I thought being a ghostwriter would be a good practice for writing novels.
And Alice, I had a contract actually with Alice for a book that I had to, the first sensible thing I did in the early 70s was to welch on a contract to write a book called The Frontiers of American Decadence.
I was going to write about Miami.
So I owed Alice a book, and she came with me to me desperate, saying that John Dean had turned in his manuscript on Watergate, and that it ended with him going to Washington.
And his explanation was that he had already testified about Watergate, so that he thought everybody already had all they needed on that, and that this was about his growing up.
And so she panicked and said, would you go out there?
So I went out, and I lived with Dean and wrote Find Ambition.
And where was he?
He went out where?
To L.A.
He lived in Los Angeles.
lived with him and Moe and their two poodles for eight months of concentrated work, wrote the whole book, hardly ever went out of his house.
Did you get credit for that?
Well, thanks to Taylor.
Yeah, because I remember when that book came out, it was, geez, this Dean's a good writer.
That was what people were saying.
In fact, he even tried to make himself a journalist there for a while.
Right.
Well, but see, he knew he had no career because he is,
pariah to the Democrats, because he's a Nixon person, and to Republicans, he's a turncoat.
So he's desperate, and in fact, you know, that's another long story, but he wound up essentially living off of Moe.
She went to work to support the family.
I thought she left him, no?
Didn't she either?
I would have sworn that she was going through a couple years ago.
No, she never did.
She's right there with him right now.
And of course, they're still going on, because
They are a target of right-wing conspiracy books that say that he engineered the Watergate break-in.
Gordon Liddy and all of those people, to protect Moe, who is running a call-girl ring, all of which is utter libel, but Gordon Liddy and Rush Limbaugh and all these people promote this because it exonerates Nixon.
Liddy says he was a dupe of John Dean, so they're taking this.
Liddy said this?
Yeah, oh, and Dean is suing Liddy.
The authors of a book called Silent Coup and Holborn and the publisher, which settled— Who's the publisher?
No, but in that same—I want to say Lyle Stewart.
Lyle Stewart would be—not one of the big guys.
No, not one of the big guys.
Anyway, and I'm getting dragged into this lawsuit because they're trying to say that Dean was a liar by poking holes in tiny discrepancies between his
sworn testimony and what's in Blind Ambition.
It's so hard for him to win because he's a public figure.
Right.
Everybody knows that.
But anyway, out of the success of Blind Ambition, I got a lot of offers as ghostwriters because it was different then.
It was really a ghostwritten era.
It's an amazing discipline.
Well, it is now.
It is now.
If you're Novak, this guy Novak makes big money.
Right.
See, we didn't have Novak back then, and it was all kind of on a hush-hush list that the publishers would circulate.
You know, you've got a celebrity.
If you want a book, you need a writer.
And it wasn't a developed market then the way it is now.
And I got offered several things.
And so, to me, from my mindset at the time, I said, okay, I'm practicing to be a novelist.
What I should do is to pick the person...
as different as possible from John Dean and write from his point of view or her point of view.
So I picked Bill Russell of the Boston Celtics.
Was Bill looking for a...?
Yeah.
Most of them were political figures, you know, John Mitchell.
What was the title of the Russell book?
Second Wind.
Who published that?
SNS, too?
No, that was Random House.
Bill Russell, Second Wind.
And that was a great experience.
And so then, after that, I...
I said, okay, I'm either going to write another ghost-written book, or I think maybe I'm ready to try my first novel.
If I'd done a ghost-written book, it was going to be a woman.
I was looking around for a woman.
This is all training for you.
Training.
You developed a narrative point of view.
From a narrative point of view, but also my naive point of view, that real writers are novelists, because that's what I carried with me.
We probably both still believe that.
Yeah, from my fifth grade class in Atlanta.
So I did a novel with Alice called, my second book with her, called The Empire Blues.
The Empire Blues.
And it was essentially a novelized form, a nonfiction book that I decided not to do about Miami because I went down there in the early 70s when there was a lot of terrorism and early drug trade and a lot of spies and the detritus of the Kennedy CIA vendetta against Castro and Cubans running around.
kind of da-da culture, and I didn't do that.
So I wrote this novel, which sold about, I don't know, 300 copies.
Got very good reviews.
What were you able to come in?
I would say Dean was 76.
Russell was 78.
I think this was probably 79 or 80.
Well, you're working.
You're being very productive.
And then I did a book about the Lotelier assassination, an international crime story, which actually I did only...
By accident, this guy was blown up.
He was a Chilean ambassador.
He was blown up in the embassy district in Washington by a remote-controlled bomb.
It turned out to have been sent by the Chilean secret police.
And I did it.
It was the last sayonara I did for the underworld because I was trying to get away from that.
But in retrospect, it was very good practice for King because it was with FBI agents, and it was invaluable practice.
What is the title of that book?
Called Labyrinth.
L-A-B-Y-R-I-N-T-H.
All of them, except Dean, are listed here, I think.
Why are you going to list Dean?
Because, Dean, I was a ghostwriter.
So what?
He's with Eugene so-and-so.
This is with Bill Russell.
Right.
Well, actually, Alice is telling me that Dean now would like to have me listed here, because then he could revive the book a little more, but we haven't done that yet.
But all along, after every book, I would ask Alice, do you think I can do King?
Because I always wanted to go back and do King because I knew that that was what had redirected the interest, my life's interest.
So finally she said, okay, right?
Finally she said, okay.
She kept saying, you don't have enough.
This is going to be a long project.
I can't get you enough money.
Can you do it on $10,000?
No, no.
I finally wound up getting, I think, $150,000 for three years.
That's terrific.
You had four or five books under your belt.
I had four or five books under my belt, and I've got to do all the research out of that and travel all over the country.
I get 85 for the book I'm doing now, and I've already, we just did that tax.
I'm sure you spent most of it.
I spent $22,000 last year just in traveling research.
No, it's unbelievable.
And now you see how we don't make any money.
So all of this, I'm sorry, began with your question of how did you divide it into more than one book, and that is when I had that money, and I thought I was going to do it.
That's what I like to talk about, because I have a book.
Right.
I was going to do this in three years, and three years into it, I had written this massive manuscript, and I knew there was no way.
About 83 years into it.
Oh, wait a minute.
Now, what year did you sign for this?
82.
And Parting the Waters was published in 88.
So six years.
It took twice as long as I'm supposed to do the whole thing to publish the first volume.
That book did very well, and I want to fill it in.
Right.
Well, I know, but they didn't know that.
I'm saying the impasse was when I go to them and I say I've written 900 pages of manuscript and I'm in 1961.
So what happened?
We were at Loggerheads and I went and wrote magazine articles because they wouldn't advance any more money.
I said it's got to be two volumes.
There's no way I'm going to get it in one volume.
It'll be a 3,000 page manuscript.
They said, books about race don't sell very well, and massive books about race sell less well, and massive two-volume books about race are a joke.
Collections of columns.
Right.
That's what they do about the worst.
Anyway, we were renegotiating all this, and while we were at Ladderheads, I had to quit and go back and write magazine articles and freelance for a time, but then we came to an agreement.
So I finished pouring the water.
They don't understand that, do they?
I just did a piece for Civilization of Maurice Sendak.
I got five grand for that.
And my editor says, well, geez, isn't this going in the book?
I said, of course it's going in the book.
I said, but I need money to live.
They don't understand that at all, do they?
We are very peculiar and misunderstood trade.
Now, for this book, it was their idea to cut it off.
Sure, because the first one did well.
Because I was pretty much invested in sticking with it, and I only had the manuscript.
It was only 1,400 pages long.
It hadn't gotten that far.
Yeah, so where part of the waters was, and I cut it.
This is down to about 900 pages, I would say, manuscript pages, no?
Yeah, something like that.
So the cutting was not quite as bad on this one as it was on the first one.
But it was their idea.
They said, you've got a perfect breaking off point in 65.
You're not going to be able to get it to 68.
It's been nine years, or almost nine years then.
By the way, it's been eight years.
and you really should get another volume out.
We think this is a natural breaking point, and I agree.
So it was their idea to do three.
And so the titles, you obviously have the title for the next volume already.
They're all out of Exodus.
I'm kind of an Exodus person.
Would you describe this as an exercise in journalism, literary journalism, or is it, I mean, it's certainly not, I mean, the scholarship is excellent.
I really spend, I spend a lot of time with sources.
I like to see what you've done with the sources.
Well, I think that particularly in race, I don't know, I have this maxim, I think that libraries preserve what cultures are comfortable with.
It's a repository of comfort.
That's what you expect to find in libraries.
And we're not comfortable historically with race, and so you don't find a lot of
primary, first-hand information about race and libraries, and so... They were research libraries.
Research libraries.
For example, Reconstruction in the Civil War, had it not been for the accident of the Depression and the WPA oral histories, which went out and did oral histories with ex-slaves in the 30s, by which time the only ex-slaves there were were 70 and 80 years old.
That's all we had as a primary resource material about what it was like to be a slave.
because the libraries in the 1860s, 1870s, 1880s, nobody was collecting that kind of material.
It's too sensitive.
And I think that we have a... You think that was... I don't think it even occurred to them that this is an important epoch in the history of freedom in America and somebody ought to be out collecting material about what it was like to have been a slave or what reconstruction was like.
Were they collecting anything else?
at that time in an oral manner?
Maybe the whole concept of the oral biography hadn't... Well, it is new.
Yeah, there are a lot of things that push that.
Well, there were people writing letters.
There was an awful lot of material for later historians to work about, refracting off of most other topics from the period of 1860 to 1880.
But if you were interested in what it was like, what the culture of slavery was like, or how it went from being a slave culture to a reconstruction culture, there wasn't a whole hell of a lot to write with.
So where did you get your primary sources?
I got another question for you when you're done with that.
I think there's no substitute for lots of interviews in oral histories, which is why I was kind of obsessed to try to complete this while so many of the people are still alive.
You taped them?
I do, when I can.
To transcribe them yourself?
Absolutely.
I did get a grant after parting the waters for somebody to do, for two years, the Ford Foundation paid for somebody to transcribe some of the interviews for Pillar of Fire.
But, you know, the problem is, particularly these Southerners, they can't understand the Southern accents, and then I've got these Muslims, and they can't understand the Muslims, and
You know, they can't understand the rabbi.
My first book, I had a woman doing mine.
She made more of it.
She got more money than I did.
Yeah.
And they're worthless.
I mean, there's no substitute to doing it.
I'm working with voice dictation now, by the way.
It's still not there yet.
Really?
I listen to it, and it's hot.
But the IBM one.
But I think it's getting to it.
a level of sophistication that might be pretty good.
You know, I never thought of this before, but in the ghost written books, I worked with tape recorders too because I was trying to learn the speech patterns because I was trying to write in somebody else's voice.
And actually that's a very useful exercise because when you do transcribe somebody,
that you interview on tape and you have a quote that you want to do, if you do this for yourself, you're familiar with, you can almost recognize a phony quote from somebody else quote somebody that doesn't sound right.
That's not Ralph Abernathy's language, or that's not John Lewis's language, and you can go back and double check them.
So, yeah, there's not much substitute for that.
But of course, aside from interviews, we do have the wonderful anti-constitutional but historically valuable invention of the wiretap.
So government archives are very, very useful, and government documents are very useful.
Did you have trouble getting access?
To some, yeah.
Did you have trouble with the King family?
I mean, they've made it really tough for people to see this stuff.
Not so much up here for you, but the stuff down in Atlanta.
Well, everybody's had trouble with the King family.
I've been thrown out of that library a number of times.
But fortunately, I was there.
I was one of their first customers.
They opened in 1982, and I was there.
And I think I spent years on and off in there.
I got my research done before then money.
Basically, it has a life cycle.
After King was killed, there were all these Ford Foundation and labor unions and everybody rushed in with money.
By the 80s, it started to run out.
Then they started trying to figure out their ways to make money out of what they had.
What they had was the archives.
There's really no way to make money.
They're trying to squeeze blood out of a turnip.
But fortunately, I had most of my work done before that.
So I haven't had that much trouble, although I testified on behalf of BU up here that the papers should not go back.
And really, I was the representational person because all the King Scholars who went down there have been hounded, including some of the people who are most loyal to them and even who work for them.
They're just incapable of, you know, their attitude is the opposite of what an archive ought to be.
They want to control what's coming out and get a piece of it if they can.
And even influence the way it is.
And along the way, it takes forever to make a decision, yes or no, just because they enjoy the fact that, you know, that you're beholden to them and have to wait.
They like the cut of your jigs.
So it'll wait for a long time.
So lots of people had suffered terribly down there, and when she moved to get the materials back from BU down there, I testified against it on the ground that I thought it would be very harmful if they had a monopoly on their historical resources because...
because the attitude that they had down there was kind of inimicable to what an archive ought to be.
Well, he'd slam the stuff over.
Right.
Well, she had to impeach her own husband because he had to say he wasn't in his right mind.
There's no ambiguity in the document at all.
I mean, it's pretty clear, isn't it?
Yeah, but it's very, very controversial because most people don't want to be on the wrong side of the sainted widow.
So Julian Bond, he wouldn't testify, but he's now joined me.
We've been publicly...
I've kind of spoken out on behalf of others on this.
But yeah, so that archive is rough.
There are a lot of places that you have to go.
You have to go to the presidential libraries.
You have to go to the FBI.
You have to go to the major places where there are collections of the figures of Philip Randolph and Roy Wilkins and any number of other people.
And the King Library is valuable, but I'm really glad that I did my research when I did because I don't think I could do it now.
I don't think I could do it now.
You're going to go out in a few minutes.
Another thing about it, it's 30 years now.
I mean, when you break off, it's 1968.
It is really history now, isn't it?
Yeah, it is, and I've noticed that it's changed.
I'm just waking up to the fact that it's changed, even in the nine years since Parting the Waters, because another half-generation has passed by.
And when Parting the Waters came, I'm just thinking this now, because I've been out on the road a little bit in the last month.
It's only been a month, basically.
that when Parting the Waters came out, most of the people who interviewed me were in their 30s, and they remembered this as something that affected them, and it was a rekindling of a memory.
Now most of the people who interview me are in their 30s, and this is like, why should I care about this?
I was asked on the air in San Francisco by an anchor person.
Admittedly, it was TV, where you get the shallowest airbrush.
She said, I see here that Dr. King was involved with J. Edgar Hoover.
Was he affiliated with the FBI?
And this woman had no idea that J. Edgar Hoover was affiliated with the FBI.
And this is true.
That's embarrassing.
But, I mean, this really is history now, and now, rather than recapturing
a period that everybody knows is significant, my task in trying to promote the book is to tell people to whom they never heard of any of this why it's important.
And that's a different... In only nine years.
But those people aren't going to buy the book, though.
Right.
Buy a big book like this.
People who have to know who Martin Luther King is, who was... Well, it was terrible out there.
We were going to walk out.
We still had a minute.
Okay, we'll be there in a minute.
You want to sign this book for me?
Sure.
Did you come into this with any kind of a... What's the word I'm looking for?
Not an agenda, but you must have come in with some baggage, right?
You must have certainly had a point of view.
You mean when I started all these years ago?
Yeah.
Yeah, I admired the period.
I felt, but a lot of it was just sheer respect, that I felt that the movement had enough power to change the direction of my life's interest when I'm not looking for it to do that, and I'm not part of it.
I'm a white Southerner growing up in the segregated South, so I figured this thing, I had the respect for its power, and I admired it, but...
I didn't have any sense of the depth of it or the sophistication of it.
I tended to belittle it like most white students who saw it as a kind of an infantile version of our really complex anti-war movement.
And now I see this as much more complex than what we did and what we did was to really screw up a lot of the things that they did.
So, yeah, I came into it with a respect and a kind of a preconception and an admiration.
Let me make sure I spell your last name.
Okay, well that's good, thanks.